README.adoc, before:

---
tags: [spring-cloud, config server]
projects: [spring-cloud, spring-cloud-config]
---
:toc:
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: prettify
:project_id: gs-centralized-configuration

This guide walks you through the process of standing up, and consuming configuration from, the http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Spring Cloud Config Server]

== What you'll build

You'll setup a http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Config Server] and then build a client that consumes the configuration on startup and then _refreshes_ the configuration without restarting the client.

== What you'll need

:java_version: 1.8
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/prereq_editor_jdk_buildtools.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/how_to_complete_this_guide.adoc[]

[[reveal-gradle]]
[.reveal-gradle]
== Build with Gradle

[[scratch]]
[.use-gradle]
== Build with Gradle

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/build_system_intro.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_directory_structure_hello.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_both_builds.adoc[]

`configuration-service/build.gradle`
// AsciiDoc source formatting doesn't support groovy, so using java instead
[source,java]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-service/build.gradle[]
----

`configuration-client/build.gradle`
// AsciiDoc source formatting doesn't support groovy, so using java instead
[source,java]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-client/build.gradle[]
----

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/spring-boot-gradle-plugin.adoc[]

[[reveal-maven]]
[.reveal-maven]
== Build with Maven

[[use-maven]]
[.use-maven]
== Build with Maven

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/build_system_intro_maven.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_directory_structure_hello.adoc[]

To get you started quickly, here are the complete configurations for the server and client applications:

`configuration-service/pom.xml`
[source,xml]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-service/pom.xml[]
----

`configuration-client/pom.xml`
[source,xml]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-client/pom.xml[]
----

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/spring-boot-maven-plugin.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/hide-show-sts.adoc[]


[[initial]]
== Stand up a Config Server
You'll first need a Config Service to act as a sort of intermediary between your Spring applications and a typically version-controlled repository of configuration files. You can use Spring Cloud's `@EnableConfigServer` to standup a config server that other applications can talk to. This is a regular Spring Boot application with one annotation added to _enable_ the config server.

`configuration-service/src/main/java/hello/ConfigServiceApplication.java`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/java/hello/ConfigServiceApplication.java[]
----

The Config Server needs to know which repository to manage. There are several choices here, but we'll use a Git-based filesystem repository. You could as easily point the Config Server to a Github or GitLab repository, as well. On the file system, create a new directory and `git init` it. Then add a file called `a-bootiful-client.properties` to the Git repository. Make sure to also `git commit` it, as well. Later, you will connect to the Config Server with a Spring Boot application whose `spring.application.name` property identifies it as `a-bootiful-client` to the Config Server. This is how the Config Server will know which set of configuration to send to a specific client. It will _also_ send all the values from any file named `application.properties` or `application.yml` in the Git repository. Property keys in more specifically named files (like `a-bootiful-client.properties`) override those in `application.properties` or `application.yml`.

Add a simple property and value, `message = Hello world`, to the newly created `a-bootiful-client.properties` file and then `git commit` the change.

Specify the path to the Git repository by specifying the `spring.cloud.config.server.git.uri` property in `configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`. Make sure to also specify a different `server.port` value to avoid port conflicts when you run both this server and another Spring Boot application on the same machine.

`configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`
[source,properties]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties[]
----


== Reading Configuration from the Config Server using the Config Client

Now that we've stood up a Config Server, let's stand up a new Spring Boot application that uses the Config Server to load its own configuration and that _refreshes_ its  configuration to reflect changes to the Config Server on-demand, without restarting the JVM. Add the `org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-config` dependency in order to connect to the Config Server. Spring will see the configuration property files just like it would any property file loaded from `application.properties` or `application.yml` or any other `PropertySource`.

The properties to configure the  Config Client must necessarily be read in _before_ the rest of the application's configuration is read from the Config Server, during the _bootstrap_ phase. Specify the client's `spring.application.name` as `a-bootiful-client` and the location of the Config Server `spring.cloud.config.uri` in `configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`, where it will be loaded earlier than any other configuration.


`configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties[]
----


The client may access any value in the Config Server using the traditional mechanisms (e.g. `@ConfigurationProperties`, `@Value("${...}")` or through the `Environment` abstraction). Create a Spring MVC REST controller that returns the resolved `message` property's value. Consult the https://spring.io/guides/gs/rest-service/[Building a RESTful Web Service] guide to learn more about building REST services with Spring MVC and Spring Boot.

By default, the configuration values are read on the client's startup, and not again. You can force a bean to _refresh_ its configuration - to pull updated values from the Config Server - by annotating the `MessageRestController` with the Spring Cloud Config `@RefreshScope` and then by triggering a _refresh_ event.

`configuration-client/src/main/java/hello/ConfigClientApplication.java`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/java/hello/ConfigClientApplication.java[]
----

== Test the application

Test the end-to-end result by starting the Config Service first and then, once loaded, starting the client. Visit the client app in the browser, `http://localhost:8080/message`. There, you should see the String `Hello world` reflected in the response.

Change the `message` key in the `a-bootiful-client.properties` file in the Git repository to something different (`Hello Spring!`, perhaps?). You can confirm that the Config Server sees the change by visiting `http://localhost:8888/a-bootiful-client/default`. You need to invoke the `refresh` Spring Boot Actuator endpoint in order to force the client to refresh itself and draw the new value in. Spring  Boot's Actuator  exposes operational endpoints, like health checks and environment information, about an application. In order to use it you must add `org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-actuator` to the client app's CLASSPATH. You can invoke the  `refresh` Actuator endpoint by sending an empty HTTP `POST` to the client's `refresh` endpoint, `http://localhost:8080/refresh`, and then confirm it worked by reviewing the `http://localhost:8080/message` endpoint.

NOTE: we set `management.security.enabled=false` in the client app to make this easy to test (by default since Spring Boot 1.5 the Actuator endpoints are secure by default). By default you can still access them over JMX if you don't set the flag.


== Summary
Congratulations! You've just used Spring to centralize configuration for all your services by first standing up a  and to then dynamically update configuration.

== See Also

The following guides may also be helpful:

* https://spring.io/guides/gs/spring-boot/[Building an Application with Spring Boot]
* https://spring.io/guides/gs/multi-module/[Creating a Multi Module Project]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/footer.adoc[]

Commit message:

Clarify location of default git repository

README.adoc, after:

---
tags: [spring-cloud, config server]
projects: [spring-cloud, spring-cloud-config]
---
:toc:
:icons: font
:source-highlighter: prettify
:project_id: gs-centralized-configuration

This guide walks you through the process of standing up, and consuming configuration from, the http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Spring Cloud Config Server]

== What you'll build

You'll setup a http://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-config/spring-cloud-config.html[Config Server] and then build a client that consumes the configuration on startup and then _refreshes_ the configuration without restarting the client.

== What you'll need

:java_version: 1.8
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/prereq_editor_jdk_buildtools.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/how_to_complete_this_guide.adoc[]

[[reveal-gradle]]
[.reveal-gradle]
== Build with Gradle

[[scratch]]
[.use-gradle]
== Build with Gradle

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/build_system_intro.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_directory_structure_hello.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_both_builds.adoc[]

`configuration-service/build.gradle`
// AsciiDoc source formatting doesn't support groovy, so using java instead
[source,java]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-service/build.gradle[]
----

`configuration-client/build.gradle`
// AsciiDoc source formatting doesn't support groovy, so using java instead
[source,java]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-client/build.gradle[]
----

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/spring-boot-gradle-plugin.adoc[]

[[reveal-maven]]
[.reveal-maven]
== Build with Maven

[[use-maven]]
[.use-maven]
== Build with Maven

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/build_system_intro_maven.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/create_directory_structure_hello.adoc[]

To get you started quickly, here are the complete configurations for the server and client applications:

`configuration-service/pom.xml`
[source,xml]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-service/pom.xml[]
----

`configuration-client/pom.xml`
[source,xml]
----
include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/{project_id}/master/initial/configuration-client/pom.xml[]
----

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/spring-boot-maven-plugin.adoc[]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/hide-show-sts.adoc[]


[[initial]]
== Stand up a Config Server
You'll first need a Config Service to act as a sort of intermediary between your Spring applications and a typically version-controlled repository of configuration files. You can use Spring Cloud's `@EnableConfigServer` to standup a config server that other applications can talk to. This is a regular Spring Boot application with one annotation added to _enable_ the config server.

`configuration-service/src/main/java/hello/ConfigServiceApplication.java`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/java/hello/ConfigServiceApplication.java[]
----

The Config Server needs to know which repository to manage. There are several choices here, but we'll use a Git-based filesystem repository. You could as easily point the Config Server to a Github or GitLab repository, as well. On the file system, create a new directory and `git init` it. Then add a file called `a-bootiful-client.properties` to the Git repository. Make sure to also `git commit` it, as well. Later, you will connect to the Config Server with a Spring Boot application whose `spring.application.name` property identifies it as `a-bootiful-client` to the Config Server. This is how the Config Server will know which set of configuration to send to a specific client. It will _also_ send all the values from any file named `application.properties` or `application.yml` in the Git repository. Property keys in more specifically named files (like `a-bootiful-client.properties`) override those in `application.properties` or `application.yml`.

Add a simple property and value, `message = Hello world`, to the newly created `a-bootiful-client.properties` file and then `git commit` the change.

Specify the path to the Git repository by specifying the `spring.cloud.config.server.git.uri` property in `configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`. Make sure to also specify a different `server.port` value to avoid port conflicts when you run both this server and another Spring Boot application on the same machine.

`configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`
[source,properties]
----
include::complete/configuration-service/src/main/resources/application.properties[]
----

In this example we are using a file-based git repository at `${HOME}/Desktop/config`. You can create one easily by making a new directory and git committing properties and YAML files to it. E.g.

----
$ cd ~/Desktop/config
$ find .
./.git
...
./application.yml
----

Or you could use a remote git repository, e.g. on github, if you change the configuration file in the application to point to that instead.


== Reading Configuration from the Config Server using the Config Client

Now that we've stood up a Config Server, let's stand up a new Spring Boot application that uses the Config Server to load its own configuration and that _refreshes_ its  configuration to reflect changes to the Config Server on-demand, without restarting the JVM. Add the `org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-config` dependency in order to connect to the Config Server. Spring will see the configuration property files just like it would any property file loaded from `application.properties` or `application.yml` or any other `PropertySource`.

The properties to configure the  Config Client must necessarily be read in _before_ the rest of the application's configuration is read from the Config Server, during the _bootstrap_ phase. Specify the client's `spring.application.name` as `a-bootiful-client` and the location of the Config Server `spring.cloud.config.uri` in `configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`, where it will be loaded earlier than any other configuration.


`configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/resources/bootstrap.properties[]
----


The client may access any value in the Config Server using the traditional mechanisms (e.g. `@ConfigurationProperties`, `@Value("${...}")` or through the `Environment` abstraction). Create a Spring MVC REST controller that returns the resolved `message` property's value. Consult the https://spring.io/guides/gs/rest-service/[Building a RESTful Web Service] guide to learn more about building REST services with Spring MVC and Spring Boot.

By default, the configuration values are read on the client's startup, and not again. You can force a bean to _refresh_ its configuration - to pull updated values from the Config Server - by annotating the `MessageRestController` with the Spring Cloud Config `@RefreshScope` and then by triggering a _refresh_ event.

`configuration-client/src/main/java/hello/ConfigClientApplication.java`
[source,java]
----
include::complete/configuration-client/src/main/java/hello/ConfigClientApplication.java[]
----

== Test the application

Test the end-to-end result by starting the Config Service first and then, once loaded, starting the client. Visit the client app in the browser, `http://localhost:8080/message`. There, you should see the String `Hello world` reflected in the response.

Change the `message` key in the `a-bootiful-client.properties` file in the Git repository to something different (`Hello Spring!`, perhaps?). You can confirm that the Config Server sees the change by visiting `http://localhost:8888/a-bootiful-client/default`. You need to invoke the `refresh` Spring Boot Actuator endpoint in order to force the client to refresh itself and draw the new value in. Spring  Boot's Actuator  exposes operational endpoints, like health checks and environment information, about an application. In order to use it you must add `org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-actuator` to the client app's CLASSPATH. You can invoke the  `refresh` Actuator endpoint by sending an empty HTTP `POST` to the client's `refresh` endpoint, `http://localhost:8080/refresh`, and then confirm it worked by reviewing the `http://localhost:8080/message` endpoint.

NOTE: we set `management.security.enabled=false` in the client app to make this easy to test (by default since Spring Boot 1.5 the Actuator endpoints are secure by default). By default you can still access them over JMX if you don't set the flag.


== Summary
Congratulations! You've just used Spring to centralize configuration for all your services by first standing up a  and to then dynamically update configuration.

== See Also

The following guides may also be helpful:

* https://spring.io/guides/gs/spring-boot/[Building an Application with Spring Boot]
* https://spring.io/guides/gs/multi-module/[Creating a Multi Module Project]

include::https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spring-guides/getting-started-macros/master/footer.adoc[]
